how-to: virtio-fs initial documentation (#469)
kata-containers/documentation: how-to/how-to-use-virtio-fs-with-kata.md

Enabling of virtio-fs requires changes in the guest kernel as well as the VMM. For Kata Containers, experimental virtio-fs support is enabled through the [NEMU VMM](https://github.com/intel/nemu).

**Note: virtio-fs support is experimental in the 1.7 release of Kata Containers. Work is underway to improve stability, performance and upstream integration. This is available for early preview - use at your own risk**

This document describes how to get Kata Containers to work with virtio-fs.

## Pre-requisites

* This feature currently requires the host to have hugepages support enabled. Enable this with the `sysctl vm.nr_hugepages=1024` command on the host.

## Install Kata Containers with virtio-fs support

The Kata Containers NEMU configuration, the NEMU VMM and the virtiofs daemon are available in the [Kata Container release](https://github.com/kata-containers/runtime/releases) artifacts starting with the 1.7 release. While the feature is experimental, distribution packages are not supported, but installation is available through [kata-deploy](https://github.com/kata-containers/packaging/tree/master/kata-deploy).

Install the latest release of Kata as follows:
```

> docker run -v /opt/kata:/opt/kata -v /var/run/dbus:/var/run/dbus -v /run/systemd:/run/systemd -v /etc/docker:/etc/docker -it katadocker/kata-deploy kata-deploy-docker install

Reviewer: OMG! nice! just in case I'd add `--runtime=runc` not a blocker

```

This will place the Kata release artifacts in `/opt/kata`, and update Docker's configuration to include a runtime target, `kata-nemu`. Learn more about kata-deploy and how to use kata-deploy in Kubernetes [here](https://github.com/kata-containers/packaging/tree/master/kata-deploy#kubernetes-quick-start).

## Running a Kata Container utilizing virtio-fs

Once installed, start a new container, utilizing NEMU + virtiofs:
```bash
$ docker run --runtime=kata-nemu -it busybox
```

Verify the new container is running with the NEMU hypervisor as well as using virtiofsd. To do this look for the hypervisor path and the virtiofs daemon process on the host:
```bash

> $ ps -aux | grep virt

Reviewer: `virtiofsd`  could be better virt is a very generic prefix.

# Kata Containers with virtio-fs

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Pre-requisites](#pre-requisites)
* [Configure Kata Containers](#configure-kata-containers)

## Introduction

[virtio-fs](https://virtio-fs.gitlab.io/) is a shared file system that lets virtual machines access a directory tree on the host. In Kata, virtio-fs can be used to share the rootfs of the container on the host within the guest to provide significant performance improvements over 9p (the current default sharing mechanism).

> **Note: This feature is still experimental and work is being done to get this production ready. Use at your own risk**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note: virtio-fs support is experimental in the 1.7 release of Kata Containers. Work is underway to improve stability, performance and upstream integration. This is available for early preview - use at your own risk **
```

This document describes how to get Kata Containers to work with virtio-fs.

## Pre-requisites

This document requires Kata Containers to be [installed](https://github.com/kata-containers/documentation/blob/master/install/README.md) on your system.

* virtio-fs is currently only available with [NEMU](https://github.com/kata-containers/documentation/blob/master/how-to/how-to-use-kata-containers-with-nemu.md)

> * This feature currently requires the host to have hugepages support enabled. For eg: this can be enabled with `sysctl vm.nr_hugepages=1024` command on the host. `1024` is the default cache size as defined in kata's configuration file.

Reviewer 3: Suggested rewrite: 
This feature currently requires the host to have hugepages support enabled. Enable this with the `sysctl vm.nr_hugepages=1024` command on the host. ....

> * This feature currently requires the host to have hugepages support enabled. Enable this with the `sysctl vm.nr_hugepages=1024` command on the host.

Reviewer 4: "enable_hugepages = true" is also required in /etc/kata-containers/configuration.toml.

Reviewer 5: Thanks @stefanha - @ganeshmaharaj - could you raise a follow-up to fix this?

## Configure Kata Containers

> All you need for this section is to modify the configuration file `/usr/share/defaults/kata-containers/configuration.toml` to specify the options related to this feature.

Reviewer 3: Suggested rewrite:
To configure Kata Containers, modify the configuration file `/usr/share/defaults/kata-containers/configuration.toml` to specify the options related to this feature.

```diff
 [hypervisor.qemu]
-path = "/usr/bin/qemu-lite-system-x86_64"
+path = "/home/foo/build-x86_64_virt/x86_64_virt-softmmu/qemu-system-x86_64_virt"
 kernel = "/usr/share/kata-containers/vmlinuz.container"
 initrd = "/usr/share/kata-containers/kata-containers-initrd.img"
 image = "/usr/share/kata-containers/kata-containers.img"
-machine_type = "pc"
+machine_type = "virt"

 # Optional space-separated list of options to pass to the guest kernel.
 # For example, use `kernel_params = "vsyscall=emulate"` if you are having
@@ -31,7 +31,7 @@ kernel_params = ""

 # Path to the firmware.
 # If you want that qemu uses the default firmware leave this option empty
-firmware = ""
+firmware = "/usr/share/nemu/OVMF.fd"

 # Machine accelerators
 # comma-separated list of machine accelerators to pass to the hypervisor.
@@ -100,10 +100,10 @@ disable_block_device_use = false
 # Shared file system type:
 #   - virtio-9p (default)
 #   - virtio-fs
-shared_fs = "virtio-9p"
+shared_fs = "virtio-fs"

 # Path to vhost-user-fs daemon.
-virtio_fs_daemon = ""
+virtio_fs_daemon = "/home/foo/build-x86_64_virt/virtiofsd-x86_64"
```

> As you can see from the snippet above, all you need to change are:

Reviewer 3: Suggested rewrite: 
As you can see from the previous snippet, you only need to change the following:

> As you can see from the snippet above, all you need to change are:

Reviewer 5: I like the diff and the explanation. But the ideal would be to make this document ["executable"](https://github.com/kata-containers/tests/blob/master/.ci/kata-doc-to-script.sh) so that we can run it in the CI, to ensure it is always correct.

Doing that would require:

- Telling the user to install the `crudini` package.
- Calling `crudini` a few times to set the appropriate config values, like:
  ```bash
  $ file=/usr/share/defaults/kata-containers/configuration.toml
  $ sudo crudini --set "$file" hypervisor.qemu path '"/home/foo/build-x86_64_virt/x86_64_virt-softmmu/qemu-system-x86_64_virt"

wdyt? Can we arrange for the appropriate pieces to be built in the CI under `/home/foo/`?

Author: i mirrored this part of the document similar to how the nemu document was written. Not sure how that works with cruidini today. @chavafg @GabyCT  any thoughts?

Reviewer 5: Understood. As doc is so critical though, I think we should ensure that as much of it as possible is "testable" as bitrotted documentation is useless to users. I'm happy to update the nemu doc with `crudini` if we think we can make both docs testable, to ensure their ongoing accuracy.

Reviewer 5: I've raised #472 for the nemu doc updates...

Author: Wondering if we can do it as a follow-up change.

- the path to the hypervisor binary. `/home/foo/build-x86_64_virt/x86_64_virt-softmmu/qemu-system-x86_64_virt` in this example.
- The machine name from `pc` to `virt`,
- The path of the firmware binary, `/usr/share/nemu/OVMF.fd` in this example,
- The `shared_fs` option to `virtio_fs`,
- The path of the virtiofsd daemon. `/home/foo/build-x86_64_virt/virtiofsd-x86_64` in this example.

> Once you have saved these modifications, you can start a new container:

Reviewer 3: Suggested rewrite: 
Once you save these modifications, start a new container:

```bash
$ docker run --runtime=kata-runtime -it busybox
```

> Verify this new container is running with the NEMU hypervisor and also using virtiofsd by looking for the hypervisor path and the virtiofs daemon process on the host:

Reviewer 3: Suggested rewrite: 
Verify the new container is running with the NEMU hypervisor as well as using virtiofsd. To do this look for the hypervisor path and the virtiofs daemon process on the host:

```bash

> $ ps -aux | grep virt

Reviewer 5: Alternatively, you could run `kata-runtime kata-env`.

Author: I wasn't sure that command will tell me about all the processes running on the host. we want to show the user that they will see the virtio-fs daemon running.

Reviewer 5: Ack.

As of the 1.7 release of Kata Containers, [9pfs](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/9p.txt) is the default filesystem sharing mechanism. While this does allow for workload compatability, it does so with degraded performance and potential for POSIX compliance limitations.

To help address these limitations, [virtio-fs](https://virtio-fs.gitlab.io/) has been developed. virtio-fs is a shared file system that lets virtual machines access a directory tree on the host. In Kata Containers, virtio-fs can be used to share container volumes, secrets, config-maps, configuration files (hostname, hosts, resolv.conf) and the container rootfs on the host with the guest.  virtio-fs provides significant performance and POSIX compliance improvements compared to 9pfs.

**Note: virtio-fs support is experimental in the 1.7 release of Kata Containers. Work is underway to improve stability, performance and upstream integration. This is available for early preview - use at your own risk**

This document describes how to get Kata Containers to work with virtio-fs.

## Pre-requisites

> 

Author: Should we mention that it currently only works with NEMU here?

Reviewer 2: Ah, I made more explicit.

* This feature currently requires the host to have hugepages support enabled. Enable this with the `sysctl vm.nr_hugepages=1024` command on the host.

> 

Author: Is the `virtio-fs the hard way` doc an enhancement for later?

Reviewer 2: If we want, it should be an enhancement imo.
